---
title: "Infamous data breaches"
modified: 2018-15-23T16:52:00-00:00
categories:
  - Scenario-planning
tags:
  - Scenario planning
  - Data breaches
  - Politics
  - Geopolitics
  - Predetermined element
---

Assuming no company or state intentionally hurts their own reputation, a data breach is an unintentional information disclosure. Sadly the reputation part of getting hacked is an ingredient for denial, thereby making it worse when *that* information is disclosed, leaked or spilled. Most breaches show interesting patterns worth a good laugh. For your entertainment.

- [The eBay hack](#the-ebay-hack)
- [The OPM hack](#the-opm-hack)
- [The Equifax hack](#the-equifax-hack)
- [The Yahoo hacks](#the-yahoo-hacks)
- [The JP Morgan Chase hack](#the-jp-morgan-chase-hack)

## The eBay hack

From the Emmenthaler-cheese-with-extra-holes Dept.

In May of 2014, eBay announced a massive data breach of sensitive data. The breach posed severe risks for general identity theft and password theft. It compromised names, addresses, dates of birth and encrypted passwords of all of its 145 million users. Consumers were advised to change passwords and use credit monitoring services.

Apparently, hackers got into the company network using the credentials of three corporate employees, were in the system for 229 days, and were able to make their way to the user database. eBay did not give details on how the hackers got the credentials in the first place, but as is the case with most attacks that result in credential theft, the attackers probably used a social-engineering attack of some kind, most likely phishing.

As a side note, a few days later, eBay-owned PayPal posted a blog entitled _“eBay, Inc. to Ask All eBay users to Change Passwords.”_ The blog post included nothing but the title, but quickly hit the Web after it was retweeted dozens of times. The blog post was then taken down from PayPal's site, causing even more confusion. Word had it PayPal, owned by eBay, was also hacked.

In 2016, an Independent Security Researcher [reported a critical vulnerability to eBay](https://ret2libc.wordpress.com/2016/01/11/a-tale-of-ebay-xss-and-shoddy-incident-response/) that had the capability to allow hackers to host a fake login page, a phishing page, on the eBay website in an effort to steal users' password and harvest credentials from millions of its users.

## The OPM hack

From the You-have-seriously-got-to-be-kidding-me Dept.

The hack of the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) probably started in 2012, was discovered in 2014 and did not become public until mid-2015. It took another 15 months for Congress to complete a report on it. This story is most interesting in all of its detail:

* Hackers, most likely from China, were inside the OPM system starting in 2012.
* March 20, 2014 the hack was discovered.
* In May 2014, a second (group of) hacker(s) gained access through a third-party contractor, but was not discovered until mid-2015.
* Much of what is contained in the report had already been covered in the IT or mainstream press.
    * There had been early warnings about how vulnerable the department was.
    * There was no IT security staff until 2013, no encryption or two-factor authentication for workers remotely accessing the system, no inventory of servers and databases and a general lack of awareness of all the systems connected to its networks.
    * The report summarized that the breach, and the failure to detect and contain it were, “in large part due to sloppy cyber hygiene and inadequate security technologies that left OPM with reduced visibility into the traffic on its systems.”
    * Tell-tale key findings: “OPM failed to heed repeated recommendations from its Inspector General,” starting in 2005. The discovery of the hack in March 2014 “should have sounded a high level, multi-agency national security alarm that a sophisticated, persistent actor was seeking to access OPM’s highest-value data.”
* A June 2015 letter from then OPM CIO Donna K. Seymour to the millions of victims of the breach reads that the Office of Personnel Management: “takes very seriously its responsibility to protect your information,” and offered credit monitoring service and identity fraud insurance as “a courtesy,” followed by ”Nothing in this letter should be construed as OPM or the US Government accepting liability for any of the matters covered by this letter or for any other purpose.“
* Neither Donna Seymour nor Kathleen Archuleta (head of the OPM at the time) were fired. As a nasty detail, Seymour was retired two days before she was scheduled to appear before Congress to talk about the breach.

The story shows human vulnerabilities in deep state, and left those who had a record in the stolen data flabbergasted and devastated with concern for family members. A colleague wrote:

_“My SF-86 lists every place I’ve ever lived since I was 18, every foreign travel I’ve ever taken, all of my family, their addresses,” he said. “So it’s not just my identity that’s affected. I’ve got siblings. I’ve got five kids. All of that is in there.”_

## The Equifax hack

From the There-is-much-much-more-to-it Dept.

Equifax, one of the largest credit bureaus in the U.S., said that an application vulnerability on one of their websites led to a data breach that exposed about 143 million consumers. The breach was discovered on July 29, but the company says that it likely started in mid-May. In October 2017, Equifax raised its estimate of the number of impacted consumers to 145.5 million. Then, on March 1, 2018, the company raised the number by another 2.4 million, bringing the tally to 147.9 million.

The company stated records containing Social Security Numbers, birth dates, addresses, and in some cases driver's license numbers were accessed, 209,000 consumers also had their credit card data exposed and for 182,000 consumers the breach also included “certain dispute documents with personal identifying information”.

* Equifax launched a website named [equifaxsecurity2017.com](https://www.equifaxsecurity2017.com/) for those potentially impacted.
* Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Richard F. Smith made an apology: “This is clearly a disappointing event for our company, and one that strikes at the heart of who we are and what we do. I apologize to consumers and our business customers for the concern and frustration this causes.”
* The company has hired a forensics firm to help with the investigation and offer guidance on preventing such a data breach from happening again.
* Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Richard F. Smith: “I’ve told our entire team that our goal can’t be simply to fix the problem and move on. Confronting cybersecurity risks is a daily fight. While we’ve made significant investments in data security, we recognize we must do more. And we will.”

And that is not where the story ends:

* US Congress voted to disallow consumers from suing Equifax and other companies with arbitration agreements, Oct 24, 2017
* Senators push to ditch Social Security numbers in light of Equifax hack, Nov 08, 2017
* Equifax launches its credit locking app and extends free credit freezes through June, Jan 31, 2018
* Equifax filing reveals hack was somehow even worse than previous estimates, May 08, 2018: _The 2017 hack of Equifax, already among the largest ever recorded, just got bigger. Well, they’re admitting that it was bigger than they had previously, which amounts to the same thing. Documents filed with the SEC reveal that more people, more IDs, and more info in general was stolen when the company utterly failed to protect its “users,” many of which didn’t even know they were in the database._

The company revealed various numbers around the time it disclosed the hack, though one it neglected to include was how many millions of dollars in stock were sold by executives before publicly disclosing it. But let’s not linger on their past crimes. I’m sure they’re very sorry! 

## The Yahoo hacks

rom the We-pretend-nothing-happened Dept (2013) and the And-again Dept (2014).

Yahoo reported a massive data breach involving 500 million user accounts in September 2016, while knowing an intrusion had occurred way back in 2014. The attack had compromised real names, email addresses, dates of birth and telephone numbers. Yahoo went public with it after the stolen database from the company went on sale on the black market. And only then did the company establish an independent committee to investigate the matter. A tad bit late.

The committee reported that Yahoo’s security team and senior executives knew that a state-sponsored actor (?) had hacked certain user accounts back in 2014, that some remedial actions were taken, one of which was notifying 26 users targeted in the hack (hahaha, how many out of 500 million is that?), and another was adding new security features. Some senior executives allegedly failed to comprehend or investigate the matter further.

In 2017, the U.S. Department of Justice indicted two Russian hackers and two Russian spies. The charges were hacking, economic espionage, trade secret theft, wire fraud, and identity theft.

* Investigators said the Russian government used stolen Yahoo data to spy on a range of targets in the United States, including White House and military officials, bank executives and even a gambling regulator in Nevada.
* According to [the indictment](https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/us-charges-russian-fsb-officers-and-their-criminal-conspirators-hacking-yahoo-and-millions), some victim accounts were of predictable interest to the FSB, a foreign intelligence and law enforcement service, such as personal accounts belonging to Russian journalists; Russian and U.S. government officials; employees of a prominent Russian cybersecurity company; and numerous employees of other providers whose networks the conspirators sought to exploit. However, other personal accounts belonged to employees of commercial entities, such as a Russian investment banking firm, a French transportation company, U.S. financial services and private equity firms, a Swiss bitcoin wallet and banking firm and a U.S. airline.

Not where the story ends. In December 2016, Yahoo buried the record on the Yahoo 2014 hack with the disclosure that an even earlier breach in 2013, by a different group of hackers had compromised 1 billion accounts. Besides names, dates of birth, email addresses and passwords, in this hack, security questions and answers had also been compromised. And almost a year later, in October of 2017, Yahoo finally admitted that all 3 !!! billion user accounts had been compromised. 

Yahoo offered it clients advice:

* Change your passwords and security questions and answers for any other accounts on which you used the same or similar information used for your Yahoo account;
* Review all of your accounts for suspicious activity;
* Be cautious of any unsolicited communications that ask for your personal information or refer you to a web page asking for personal information;
* Avoid clicking on links or downloading attachments from suspicious emails;
* Consider using Yahoo Account Key, a simple authentication tool that eliminates the need to use a password on Yahoo altogether.

Missing in this list is "consider an alternative to Yahoo", [something Verizon apparently did not do](https://www.mercurynews.com/2017/03/16/verizon-accused-of-aiding-and-abetting-yahoo-executives-by-using-data-breaches-to-save-350-million/).

## The JP Morgan Chase hack

From the Through-the-looking-glass Dept.

August of 2014, supposedly Russian hackers attacked the U.S. financial system in retaliation against U.S. government-sponsored sanctions aimed at Russia. The bank made it known via an [SEC 8-K filing](https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/19617/000119312514362173/d799478d8k.htm) that the breach affected 76 million households and 7 million small businesses. They confirmed that contact information of customers was compromised in the breach including name, address, phone number and email addresses and that internal JP Morgan information pertaining to customers such as credit cards and various investment products, was also accessed by parties unknown.

Additionally, the New York Times, reported at least four other firms in addition to JP Morgan were hit in the same month by co-ordinated attacks that siphoned off huge amounts of data, including checking and savings account information.

In 2015, [a worldwide hacking ring](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-11-10/hackers-accused-by-u-s-of-targeting-top-banks-mutual-funds) is broken up and information on a vast, multi-year criminal enterprise centering on hacks of at least nine big financial and publishing firms appears, in involving the theft of information on 100 million of their customers that fuelled a web of stock manipulation, credit-card fraud and illegal online casinos. Two indictments from the US tied three of four suspects to previously reported hacks of JP Morgan Chase, E*Trade Financial, Scottrade Financial Services, and Dow Jones, a unit of News Corporation.

In 2016, the only American suspect in the JP Morgan Chase hack is negotiating his return to the U.S. from a detention cell in Russia, where he is no longer welcome. A Russian judge ordered Aaron deported and fined him 5,000 rubles ($80) for violating the rules of his three-year visa, which requires holders to exit and re-enter the country every six months. Aaron arrived via Ukraine on May 23, 2015 – just weeks before the U.S. issued arrest warrants for him and co-defendants Gery Shalon and Ziv Orenstein. A second judge rejected his appeal of the deportation ruling in June 2016.

The fourth hacker remains a mystery. 
