---
title: "Flame"
modified: 2018-05-19T13:55:00-00:00
categories:
  - Scenario-planning
tags:
  - APT
  - Scenario planning
  - Governments
  - Geopolitics
  - Predetermined element
---

Flame, alias Flamer, sKyWIper, and Skywiper was announced as discovered on 28 May 2012 by MAHER Center of Iranian National Computer Emergency Response Team, Kaspersky Lab and CrySyS Lab of the Budapest University of Technology and Economics. 

Kaspersky Lab links Flame to the [Equation Group](https://securelist.com/equation-the-death-star-of-malware-galaxy/68750/):

_“It seems to me Equation Group are the ones with the coolest toys. Every now and then they share them with the Stuxnet group and the Flame group, but they are originally available only to the Equation Group people. Equation Group are definitely the masters, and they are giving the others, maybe, bread crumbs. From time to time they are giving them some goodies to integrate into Stuxnet and Flame.”_

Flame appears to have been written purely for espionage. It does not appear to target a particular industry, but rather is a complete attack toolkit designed for general cyber-espionage purposes. 

Flame can spread to other systems over a local network (LAN) or via USB stick. It can record audio, screenshots, keyboard activity and network traffic. The program also records Skype conversations and can turn infected computers into Bluetooth beacons which attempt to download contact information from nearby Bluetooth-enabled devices. It supports a “kill” command which wipes all traces of the malware from the computer. 

