---
title: "Buckeye"
modified: 2019-05-17T11:25:00-00:00
categories:
  - Scenario-planning
tags:
  - APT
  - Scenario planning
  - Governments
  - Geopolitics
  - Predetermined element
---

The first week of May 2019 the internet news was full of stories like “Chinese Hacker Crew Stole NSA Cyber Weapons In 2016” (forbes) and “Chinese spies stole NSA hacking tools, report finds” (CNN). Somewhat more subtle is the word “grab” in “How China grabbed NSA hacking tools and used them to attack U.S.” (Boing boing).

Hmmm. “Chinese intelligence agents acquired National Security Agency hacking tools and repurposed them in 2016 to attack American allies and private companies in Europe and Asia”.

How about “The United States created and used a malware to break into foreign networks and attack adversaries’ infrastructure, the malware was discovered and then turned around on its creators?”, or “How the U.S. is proliferating cyber conflict by creating a cybersecurity arsenal that is hard to keep track of and gives rise to a digital Wild, Wild West on the internet with few rules or certainties?”

Buckeye originated in the U.S., and was then adopted and adapted by Shadow Brokers. Buckeye exploited a Windows zero day alongside Equation Group tools during 2016 attacks. Exploit and tools continued to be used after Buckeye's apparent disappearance in 2017. The purpose of all the attacks was to acquire a persistent presence on the victim’s network, meaning information theft was the most likely motive of the attacks, targeting individuals and institutions globally. Sofar, attacks have been recorded in Hong Kong, Belgium, Luxembourg, Philippines, and Vietnam.  

The details of Buckeye can be found in the [Symantec report](https://www.symantec.com/blogs/threat-intelligence/buckeye-windows-zero-day-exploit), including its Indicators of Compromise. 
