---
title: "Stuxnet"
modified: 2019-09-26T16:18:00-00:00
categories:
  - Scenario-planning
tags:
  - APT
  - Scenario planning
  - Governments
  - Geopolitics
  - Predetermined element
---

In 2010, Sergey Ulasen detected the Stuxnet worm. It attacks only Siemens SCADA (supervisory control and data acquisition) systems. Despite both governments never officially acknowledging developing Stuxnet, it is widely accepted that it was created by the intelligence agencies of the United States and Israel in a classified program named “Operation Olympic Games”. 

A 2011 video created to celebrate the retirement of Israeli Defense Forces head Gabi Ashkenazi listed [Stuxnet as one of the successes](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/israel/8326387/Israel-video-shows-Stuxnet-as-one-of-its-successes.html) under his watch. Its malware damaged Iran’s nuclear program by destroying an estimated 984 uranium enrichment centrifuges.

Although meant to target only PLCs from Siemens running windows systems, it became a template and [a gift that keeps on giving](https://spectrum.ieee.org/telecom/security/the-real-story-of-stuxnet). Several other worms with infection capabilities similar to Stuxnet, like Duqu and Flame, have been identified in the wild, although their purposes are quite different. Their similarity leads experts to believe that they are products of the same development team. Stuxnet shows it is possible to bring industrial processes to a halt for political reasons. It is only a matter of time, if only as demonstration of “Yes, I can (too)” by (other) state-sponsored teams. Immediately followed by corporation-sponsored teams.

February 2013, [Symantec Security Response analysed](https://community.broadcom.com/symantecenterprise/communities/community-home/librarydocuments/viewdocument?DocumentKey=bb23acc7-b0dd-4f02-bc54-2994fc71947b&CommunityKey=1ecf5f55-9545-44d6-b0f4-4e4a7f5f5e68&tab=librarydocuments) a sample of Stuxnet predating version 1.001, revealing the latest discovery to be version 0.5 and that it was in operation between 2007 and 2009 with indications that it, or even earlier variants of it, were in operation as early as 2005. 

A November 2013 article in Foreign Policy magazine claims existence of an earlier, much more sophisticated attack on the centrifuge complex at Natanz. It is not clear whether this attack attempt was successful, but it being followed by a different, simpler and more conventional attack could be indicative. 

 

