---
title: "Acedia"
modified: 2020-10-01T09:20:00+00:00
categories:
  - Elephants
tags:
  - Causes and effects
  - Elephants
  - Cognitive
  - Blindspot
  - Pandemic
  - Linguistics
  - Prejudice
---

What we are confronting is something many writers in the pandemic have approached from varying angles: a restless distraction that stems not just from not knowing when it will all end, but also from not knowing what that end will look like. Perhaps the sharpest insight into this feeling has come from Jonathan Zecher, a historian of religion, who linked it to the forgotten Christian term: acedia.

Acedia was a malady that apparently plagued many Medieval monks. It's a sense of no longer caring about caring, not because one had become apathetic, but because somehow the whole structure of care had become jammed up. ~ Nick Couldry and Bruce Schneier

## In a word

Acedia: “spiritual or mental sloth; apathy”, with apologies to sloths, part of the superorder Xenarthrans, which also includes anteaters and armadillos, all descendants of the large bodied mammals that seem to have appeared during the Oligocene (34-23 million years ago). By the way, that's a respectably long track record for a peoples.

A word with associations (and annoyance) found by Vesna, and I fully agree with Vesna, “the focus on “care” as in “intellectual attention” is a sign of privilege (for people who can afford to not care!) and individualistic practices.”

And I go further than that. “Affording oneself not to care” seems to be part of a goal that assumes that caring is something to escape from. And that, I think, has to do with associations that “women” in their “natural role” do the “caring” (for free of course) while men in their “natural role” do the “slothing”, except for some arrogation and appropriation (mostly opportunistically) and some competing with one another for resources, causing the need for more “care” (which goes largely unnoticed when “one has escaped it” and the brunt of its effects is carried by women and other peoples).

Meanwhile, “care” from the Free Dictionary, a mostly privileged resource:

* a. A concerned or troubled state of mind, as that arising from serious responsibility; worry; b. An object or source of worry, attention, or solicitude: the many cares of a working parent; c. Interest, regard, or liking: did not show the least care for her.
* a. Close attention, as in doing something well or avoiding harm: painted the trim with care; b. Upkeep; maintenance: a product for the care of fine floors; hair care products; c. Watchful oversight; charge or supervision: left the child in the care of a neighbour.
* Attentive assistance or treatment to those in need: a hospital that provides emergency care.

## More care needed

[Care](https://wiki.techinc.nl/Hackers_tribes#Caring). Not all privileged people do not care or do care but only as an intellectual attention. Some do care concretely for communal, cooperative, life-sustaining, humanitarian safety nets, emergency relief, healthcare, skilled nursing, assisted living, ending poverty, stopping the plundering, and restoring the planet so next generations of all kinds of peoples (including animals and plants) can find a habitable world to live in …

