---
title: "The obvious wish list"
modified: 2020-09-30T06:21:00-00:00
categories:
  - Scenario-planning
tags:
  - Causes and effects
  - Elephants
  - Inductive
  - Scenario planning
  - Consciousness
---

I fear that critical mass for wish lists like these would take too long. Still, it is the most beautiful wish-list ever in my book. What if …

* People grow up all over the planet. They come to terms with their upcoming death, with being finite creatures on a finite planet, realise they can't take all those goods with them when they die, and finally let go of the trivial to celebrate life and make it worth living.
* People stopped doing the bullshit jobs.
* In a global context, flying is reduced to a minimum. Aside from having less pollution and having decreased energy demand by it, diseases do not spread as fast, and invasive species are less of a risk too. 
* In a global context, using the internet is reduced to a minimum, leading to 20% less global energy demand.
* Energy demand for heating is reduced by refurbishing all existing buildings and constructing new buildings in cold climates to meet, for example, passive hause or MINERGIE-P standards. An initial investment, but for those that can afford it, well worth it. And who knows, maybe politicians will pull up their pants, tax the rich, and make it possible for those that can not afford it. After all, these are a huge capital and energy drain on a fair society.
* In urban contexts, public transport by tram and other electric vehicles (and not individual electric vehicles) is further developed and promoted. Travel times increase some, and time is no longer considered money. Time is considered the time to live that we have on this planet and that includes making connections with others with all of our senses present and taking it in, instead of only seeing and hearing in digitized form. Real capital and freedom.
* Also, in urban contexts, self-reliance of people is increased by changing parks into edible parks (agroforestry). And more such parks appear. And roofs, and balconies. Not “smart” cities, green cities. A joy for the eyes to see and brains to experience.
* People walk and cycle more, especially through such parks.
* Solar, geothermal, tidal and other renewable energy resources are developed and improved further and effectively replace fossil fuels.
* Waste is no longer exported to other countries, as we really learn to recycle as much as possible. We take response-ability (accept what comes back to us as a result of our actions and in-actions and deal with those instead of ignoring and/or sending the shit elsewhere) and we produce less waste.
* Stop importing bananas, etc. Buy local, eat seasonal.
* Diets change from meat and dairy (which have high emissions and use a lot of land) to diets with more from plant-based sources like beans, nuts, cereals and vegetables. Has a huge impact on general health too.
* Land that is freed by the diet change is being reforested with indigenous plants (to become wild again). We are using old and new ways, not harmful to amphibians, insects, and mycorrhizal fungi, to initially help that along, and after that, we leave nature to its wisdom and its practice of capturing carbon.
* Essential biodiversity in agricultural areas is also restored, which reduces unnecessary food imports, pesticides and artificial fertilisers are no longer necessary, and more carbon is captured.
* …

