---
title: "Advanced persistent threats"
modified: 2021-05-30T16:41:00-00:00
categories:
  - Scenario-planning
tags:
  - Scenario planning
  - Governments
  - Geopolitics
  - Predetermined element
---

An Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) is a systematic attack by a group of skilled, sophisticated adversaries, usually directed and supported by corporations and/or nation states(s). These are not quick or coincidental attacks by script kiddies, but carefully planned attacks against strategic targets. Below a few of the infamously known attacks, for further study of their patterns.

- [2021](#2021)
- [2020](#2020)
- [Buckeye](#buckeye)
- [Dark Caracal](#dark-caracal)
- [Stuxnet](#stuxnet)
- [CloudAtlas alias Inception](#cloudatlas-alias-inception)
- [Operation Manul](#operation-manul)
- [Flame](#flame)
- [Duqu](#duqu)

## 2021

COVID-19 (and its effects). After the initial chaos, reorganisations towards remote work make security a new priority, and more exploitations of network appliances such as VPN gateways are likely to appear, and the subsequent harvesting of credentials via 'vishing'.

The increasing inequality gap and poverty makes more people enter the ransomware industry and makes ransomware actors focus their activities and the experienced players to obtain APT-like capabilities – with the money already extorted and toolsets and TTP's of state-sponsored APT groups exposed (see 2020). For ransomware mitigation and prevention in general, see the [Infosec Institute's comprehensive list of methods](https://resources.infosecinstitute.com/topic/ransomware-mitigation-and-prevention/). 

## 2020

2020 saw the appearance of new attack vectors such as the targeting of network devices and the search for 5G vulnerabilities, and a rise in old(er) vectors, such as multi-stage attacks and activities enabling attacks, such as [credential stuffing](https://github.com/tymyrddin/orchard/blob/main/trees/social-engineering/Credential-stuffing.md). 

Most likely effects:

* APT threat actors will most likely buy credentials from cybercriminals and snowball further from those or even buy targeted initial network access.
* APT threat actors are likely to expose toolsets of other APT groups in an attempt to burn the others' TTP's. 
* Corporations are likely to take a stance against zero-day brokers in an effort to protect their customers and reputation. A stance, to a certain extent, as it is costly. New grazing balances appear.

## Buckeye

The first week of May 2019 the internet news was full of stories like “Chinese Hacker Crew Stole NSA Cyber Weapons In 2016” (forbes) and “Chinese spies stole NSA hacking tools, report finds” (CNN). Somewhat more subtle is the word “grab” in “How China grabbed NSA hacking tools and used them to attack U.S.” (Boing boing).

Hmmm. “Chinese intelligence agents acquired National Security Agency hacking tools and repurposed them in 2016 to attack American allies and private companies in Europe and Asia”.

How about “The United States created and used a malware to break into foreign networks and attack adversaries’ infrastructure, the malware was discovered and then turned around on its creators?”, or “How the U.S. is proliferating cyber conflict by creating a cybersecurity arsenal that is hard to keep track of and gives rise to a digital Wild, Wild West on the internet with few rules or certainties?”

Buckeye originated in the U.S., and was then adopted and adapted by Shadow Brokers. Buckeye exploited a Windows zero day alongside Equation Group tools during 2016 attacks. Exploit and tools continued to be used after Buckeye's apparent disappearance in 2017. The purpose of all the attacks was to acquire a persistent presence on the victim’s network, meaning information theft was the most likely motive of the attacks, targeting individuals and institutions globally. Sofar, attacks have been recorded in Hong Kong, Belgium, Luxembourg, Philippines, and Vietnam.  

The details of Buckeye can be found in the [Symantec report](https://www.symantec.com/blogs/threat-intelligence/buckeye-windows-zero-day-exploit), including its Indicators of Compromise. 

## Dark Caracal

This is one of the first publicly documented mobile APT actors known to execute espionage on a global scale. It is believed to be administered out of a building belonging to the Lebanese General Security Directorate in Beirut. At present, we have knowledge of hundreds of gigabytes of exfiltrated data, in 21+ countries, across thousands of victims. According to the [report by lookout](https://info.lookout.com/rs/051-ESQ-475/images/Lookout_Dark-Caracal_srr_20180118_us_v.1.0.pdf), the APT group targeted “entities that a nation-state might attack,” including governments, military personnel, utilities, financial institutions, manufacturing companies, defence contractors, medical practitioners, education professionals, academics, and civilians from numerous other fields. 

The Dark Caracal group seems to not rely on any zero-day exploits, nor on uploading an application with malware to the Google Play Store. The actor has been observed making use of desktop tooling, but has prioritised mobile devices as the primary attack vector and used basic social engineering via posts on Facebook groups and WhatsApp messages, encouraging users to visit a website controlled by the group. Once tricked into landing on the malicious websites, the victims were served fake updates to secure messenger apps, including WhatsApp, Signal, Threema Telegram, and Orbot (an open source Tor client for Android), which eventually downloaded the Dark Caracal malware, dubbed Pallas, on targets' mobile devices.

The Pallas malware family are surveillance malware that are capable of taking photographs, stealing data, spying on communications apps, recording video and audio, acquiring location data, and stealing text messages, including two-factor authentication codes, from victims' devices. 

## Stuxnet

In 2010, Sergey Ulasen detected the Stuxnet worm. It attacks only Siemens SCADA (supervisory control and data acquisition) systems. Despite both governments never officially acknowledging developing Stuxnet, it is widely accepted that it was created by the intelligence agencies of the United States and Israel in a classified program named “Operation Olympic Games”. 

A 2011 video created to celebrate the retirement of Israeli Defense Forces head Gabi Ashkenazi listed [Stuxnet as one of the successes](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/israel/8326387/Israel-video-shows-Stuxnet-as-one-of-its-successes.html) under his watch. Its malware damaged Iran’s nuclear program by destroying an estimated 984 uranium enrichment centrifuges.

Although meant to target only PLCs from Siemens running windows systems, it became a template and [a gift that keeps on giving](https://spectrum.ieee.org/telecom/security/the-real-story-of-stuxnet). Several other worms with infection capabilities similar to Stuxnet, like Duqu and Flame, have been identified in the wild, although their purposes are quite different. Their similarity leads experts to believe that they are products of the same development team. Stuxnet shows it is possible to bring industrial processes to a halt for political reasons. It is only a matter of time, if only as demonstration of “Yes, I can (too)” by (other) state-sponsored teams. Immediately followed by corporation-sponsored teams.

February 2013, [Symantec Security Response analysed](https://community.broadcom.com/symantecenterprise/communities/community-home/librarydocuments/viewdocument?DocumentKey=bb23acc7-b0dd-4f02-bc54-2994fc71947b&CommunityKey=1ecf5f55-9545-44d6-b0f4-4e4a7f5f5e68&tab=librarydocuments) a sample of Stuxnet predating version 1.001, revealing the latest discovery to be version 0.5 and that it was in operation between 2007 and 2009 with indications that it, or even earlier variants of it, were in operation as early as 2005. 

A November 2013 article in Foreign Policy magazine claims existence of an earlier, much more sophisticated attack on the centrifuge complex at Natanz. It is not clear whether this attack attempt was successful, but it being followed by a different, simpler and more conventional attack could be indicative. 

## CloudAtlas alias Inception

Malware believed to be part of a nation-state espionage campaign and reminiscent of previous Red October attacks has been caught targeting mobile devices and PCs of executives, diplomats and military. It was discovered by Blue Coat Labs and named Inception and confirmed by Kaspersky Labs who named it CloudAtlas, and exploits flaws in Microsoft Windows and seeks to infect Android, Blackberry and iOS devices, but is limited to only infecting iPhones and iPads that are jailbroken.

Targets of this campaign, inferred by the content of phishing emails include executives from oil, finance and engineering, military officers, embassy personnel and government officials. While the attacks initially aimed at individuals in Russia and other Eastern European countries, its scope has widened to include executives in the oil and energy industry in Romania, Venezuela, and Mozambique.

The Inception malware poses as a WhatsApp app update, and was packaged as a Debian installer package that “impersonates a Cydia installer, and can only be installed on a jailbroken phone.” The attack has evolved (from its first appearance in 2013, when it was named “Red October” by Kaspersky Labs), now posing as the increasingly popular WhatsApp rather than Microsoft's Skype.

Depending on device, Windows PCs and Android, BlackBerry and iOS devices, the malware collects unique device identifiers such as device's serial and phone number, carrier information and activity, such as calls logs and contacts, memory use and other status information and the names of apps iTunes has installed. To reach potential victims, the attackers devised MMS phishing campaigns through at least 60 mobile networks across the globe. Victim counts were very low and mostly in Russia and Kasazkhstan. 

## Operation Manul

Operation Manul was most likely carried out on behalf of the government of Kazakhstan. 

[EFF research](https://www.eff.org/files/2018/01/29/operation-manul.pdf) suggests links between this campaign and other campaigns that have been attributed to an Indian security company called Appin Security Group. There may also be possible links between this campaign and Arcanum Global Intelligence, a private intelligence company with headquarters in Zurich. 

Operation Manul targeted journalists, dissidents living in Europe, their family members, known associates, and their lawyers. 

## Flame

Flame, alias Flamer, sKyWIper, and Skywiper was announced as discovered on 28 May 2012 by MAHER Center of Iranian National Computer Emergency Response Team, Kaspersky Lab and CrySyS Lab of the Budapest University of Technology and Economics. 

Kaspersky Lab links Flame to the [Equation Group](https://securelist.com/equation-the-death-star-of-malware-galaxy/68750/):

_“It seems to me Equation Group are the ones with the coolest toys. Every now and then they share them with the Stuxnet group and the Flame group, but they are originally available only to the Equation Group people. Equation Group are definitely the masters, and they are giving the others, maybe, bread crumbs. From time to time they are giving them some goodies to integrate into Stuxnet and Flame.”_

Flame appears to have been written purely for espionage. It does not appear to target a particular industry, but rather is a complete attack toolkit designed for general cyber-espionage purposes. 

Flame can spread to other systems over a local network (LAN) or via USB stick. It can record audio, screenshots, keyboard activity and network traffic. The program also records Skype conversations and can turn infected computers into Bluetooth beacons which attempt to download contact information from nearby Bluetooth-enabled devices. It supports a “kill” command which wipes all traces of the malware from the computer.

## Duqu

In 2011, the CrySyS Lab of the Budapest University of Technology and Economics in Hungary discovered the Duqu worm. It seems to be related to Stuxnet, but was designed to gather industrial information rather than to interfere with industrial operations. It is possibly the creation of Unit 8200.

{% include video id="nWB_5KC7LE0" provider="youtube" %}

Experts compared the similarities with Stuxnet and found three points of interest:

* The installer exploits zero-day Windows kernel vulnerabilities.
* Components are signed with stolen digital keys.
* Duqu and Stuxnet are both highly targeted and related to the nuclear program of Iran.

On June 2015 [Duqu 2.0](https://securelist.com/the-mystery-of-duqu-2-0-a-sophisticated-cyberespionage-actor-returns/70504/) appeared at Kaspersky Lab. Duqu 2.0, alleged to be the most sophisticated computer virus ever developed, compromised Kaspersky Lab in 2014. Duqu 2.0 used at least three zero-day exploits. The virus remained for months on Kaspersky Lab's systems, undetected by them. Aside from targeting Kaspersky, it was used to spy on the negotiations for the Iran Nuclear Deal. 
